# Essence-Explorer
A prolog application to help research Essence Semat innovations. https://semat.org/

This software aims to provide a free tool for researchers in Software Engineering to have a full end to end personal implementation of Essence, an OMG Standard.
The tool allows models to be built, viewed and explored. It is a work in progress and is in no way complete. This work was started about 12 years ago, as no
free tools were available for Essence, and has slowly grown to its current state. Prolog was chosen as the language as Essentially Essence is a declarative Data model, 
with logic. Prolog also provides an ideal tool to add checking, completeness, validation logic, rules, and AI etc around Essence. The code includes a Chat Bot using an 
AI LLM, with a RAG archiecture, to interact with the core Essence data, as English statements, generated by the Prolog. Spring-AI is used for the ChatBpot but this code will 
be moved to SWIPL, in the near future, as SWIPL AI Chat libraries mature, e.g prolog2Gpt.

The Explorer uses a simple client-server model with a Javascript/Bootstrap front end, and a SWIPL Prolog backend to serve models and web pages. The backend provides a set
of REST-ish APIs, allowing front ends to be explored, changed and developed independently of the provided front end.
The model contents have been derived from the  Essence OMG standard and the public examples provided by Ivar Jacobsen International. 
There has been no exhaustive review of the code or models for validity. There is no relationship between the Author and Ivar Jacobsen Int.

The ability to have the full E2E code and be able to edit this allows any aspect of Essence to be experimented with, researched and changed.
A power point presentation is included to illustrate, at a high level, its features and design. There is also a complete ESSENCE course describing
the essentials of Essence.

The tool provides the bare minimum viable solution to quickly explore Essence for free. It is not designed as a robust commercial product.
It provides no security, scalability, reliability etc and is designed as a single person desktop application for research. 
Please do not expose the tool to the internet.

To use the application first install SWIPL prolog: https://www.swi-prolog.org/

To start the application, from the top level, execute: swipl prolog/semat_server.pl

In a browser go to http://localhost:8000/

Thanks
Kim Horn




